docsrc/imap/reference/admin/access-control/defaults.rst, before:

.. _imap-admin-access-control-defaults:

Access Control Defaults
=======================

Administrators
--------------
The admin users (:cyrusman:`imapd.conf(5)` variable "admins") get automatic go-everywhere, do-everything privileges on every mailbox. They can also see across domains which normal users can't.
 
.. note::

    An admin user should not be a normal email account. 
 
Mailbox owners
-------------- 

The user who owns a mailbox folder has additional rights which are set regardless of any additional ACLs. These are: 

* **l** - :ref:`lookup <imap-admin-access-control-right-l>`
* **k** - :ref:`create subfolders <imap-admin-access-control-right-k>`
* **x** - :ref:`delete this folder <imap-admin-access-control-right-x>`
* **a** - :ref:`administer <imap-admin-access-control-right-a>`

These are set in **implicit_owner_rights** of :cyrusman:`imapd.conf(5)`.
 
Default
-------

For all other mailboxes not owned by a user, any user accessing these mailboxes have the following default privileges:

* **l** - :ref:`lookup <imap-admin-access-control-right-l>`
* **r** - :ref:`read contents <imap-admin-access-control-right-r>`
* **s** - :ref:`seen <imap-admin-access-control-right-s>`

These are set in **defaultacl** of :cyrusman:`imapd.conf(5)`.

Commit message:

Begin re-org of documentation to reduce dupes.
There was a lot of duplicated content between the administrative
reference and the concept & overview docs.  Also, there were several
empty, or near empty, pages in both sections.

This new scheme will try to concentrate the heavier technical stuff
in the admin guide, referencing it, and, where needed, including it
from the generally lighter-weight concepts & features docs.

Heavy use is made of ".. include:" directives, which may lead to
warnings during build.  Please report these.

docsrc/imap/reference/admin/access-control/defaults.rst, after:

.. _imap-admin-access-control-defaults:

Access Control Defaults
=======================

Administrators
--------------

Regardless of the ACL on a mailbox, users who are listed in the
``admins`` configuration option in :cyrusman:`imapd.conf(5)` implicitly
have the ``l`` and ``a`` rights on all mailboxes.

Administrators can also see across domains which normal users cannot.
 
.. warning::

    An admin user should not be a normal email account. 
 
Mailbox owners
-------------- 

The user who owns a mailbox folder has additional rights which are set
regardless of any additional ACLs. These are:

* **l** - :ref:`lookup <imap-admin-access-control-right-l>`
* **k** - :ref:`create subfolders <imap-admin-access-control-right-k>`
* **x** - :ref:`delete this folder <imap-admin-access-control-right-x>`
* **a** - :ref:`administer <imap-admin-access-control-right-a>`

These are set in ``implicit_owner_rights`` of :cyrusman:`imapd.conf(5)`.
 
Default
-------

For all other mailboxes not owned by a user, any user accessing these
mailboxes have the following default privileges:

* **l** - :ref:`lookup <imap-admin-access-control-right-l>`
* **r** - :ref:`read contents <imap-admin-access-control-right-r>`
* **s** - :ref:`seen <imap-admin-access-control-right-s>`

These are set in ``defaultacl`` of :cyrusman:`imapd.conf(5)`.

Initial ACLs for Newly Created Mailboxes
----------------------------------------

When a mailbox is created, its ACL starts off with a copy of the ACL of its closest parent mailbox. When a user is created, the ACL on the user's ``INBOX`` starts off with a single entry granting all rights to the user. When a non-user mailbox is created and does not have a parent, its ACL is initialized to the value of the ``defaultacl`` option in :cyrusman:`imapd.conf(5)`.

Other Implicit Rights
---------------------

Note that some rights are available implicitly, for example 'anonymous'
always has 'p' on user INBOXes, and users always have ``la`` rights on
mailboxes within their INBOX hierarchy.
